Hi there, I'm Cla McDonald and this is
the family health lab. In today's
conversation, I'm talking with esteemed
cancer researcher, lecturer, and author
Dr. Thomas Seaffreed. Dr. Seaffreed is a
professor of biology, genetics, and
biochemistry at Boston College,
Massachusetts, and author of over 150
peer-reviewed publications and his book,
Cancer as a Metabolic Disease. Now, one
in two of us are predicted to develop
cancer, an increase that is down to our
food and lifestyle, not our genetics.
Cancer cells are ravenous for energy.
Dr. Seafood explains how depriving
cancer of its fuel sources through
techniques like ketosis and fasting is
the key to starving cancer cells. And
finally, making a breakthrough to reduce
cancer deaths.
>> You're listening to the Family Health
Lab.
Healthy parents, healthy kids.
>> Hi, Dr. Thomas Freed. Thank you so much
for joining me today.
>> Yeah, thank you.
>> And what is it that gives cells the
potential to become cancerous? Is is a
kind of particular recipe?
>> We know clearly uh what causes cancer.
Um and that was originally described by
Otto Warberg uh in the 1930 20s and 30s.
Um he he found clearly
every cancer had a defect in oxidative
phosphorilation
uh which is energy obtained through
oxygen. And um as a result of that in
order for the cell to survive it had to
rely on other forms of energy which is
energy without oxygen which is called
fermentation.
Um we're working now uh going back
through what Otto Warberg had said where
he was correct and where he made some
mistakes. Um but by and large he was he
was correct. All cancers start with
chronic disruption of their ability to
produce energy using oxygen.
Um if it's too acute of course that will
kill the cell and you'll never get a
cancer from a dead cell. But if it's
chronic over week, months, years or
whatever, more like years for humans um
and the cell has the capacity to uh
change from oxygen to energy without
oxygen then you run the risk of having
disregulated cell growth which is
cancer. Um and this can happen in any
kind of a tissue cell or any place in
the body except we rarely if ever get
cancer in cardiac meioittes from the
heart or neurons of the brain and the
reason why is those cells cannot
transition from energy from oxygen to
energy without oxygen without dying. So
there are cells in our body that rarely
if ever get cancer and that's the clue.
Uh what are the cells that get as
Warberg said only cells that can make
the transition from oxygen
energy through oxygen to energy without
oxygen which we call fermentation
metabolism energy without oxygen only
those cells can become cancer. red blood
cells that have no nucleus
uh and no mitochondria cannot become
tumor cells in mammals. So we know um in
order to have cancer you have to have
defective oxidative phosphorilation and
you have to have a nucleus so the cell
is allowed to divide
uh and that's and then the division of a
cancer cell is out of control. It's
called cell division out of control or
disregulated cell growth. That's what
the definition of cancer is. Disreg. Why
is it disregulated? Because the organel
that controls the energy metabolism in
the cell is corrupted and the cell falls
back on ancient fermentation pathways.
In order to understand cancer, one has
to understand biological evolution. If
people cannot understand biological
evolution, then they remain profoundly
ignorant of science of scientific
concepts. And um we know we understand
biological evolution uh and we
understand that all life on earth
started without oxygen. So um the cells
that cancer is simply falling back on
heirloom pathways that existed
2.5 billion years ago. So these cells
are falling back on ancient fermentation
pathways and the organel that controls
the regulation is dysfunctional. the
mitochondria that would normally get
energy through oxygen. So the cell uh
starts to grow in a disregulated uh
manner and that's what we call cancer
and it feeds on fermentation fuels which
are the sugar glucose and the amino acid
glutamine. Those are the two predominant
fermentable fuels. Um now both of them
can be respired with oxygen but if the
organel that does that is broken uh like
Warberg said and like we have found and
and and validated then you get you can
run the risk of getting disregulated
cell growth which is cancer
>> which takes us all the way into your
theory and your approach and how it
differs. Um, but we we you just sort of
hit on um ancient pathways and I'm I'm
just got me curious um how has cancer
always existed? Is this um I know we're
seeing phenomenal rates uh at the
moment, but what's the history um and
and and and the growth of the rates
looking like? Well, I I think cancer has
always existed, but in uh in early man
and in um Paleolithic man and early
civilizations, it was very very rare. Um
and apparently still is rare in in human
populations that live according to
ancient and traditional ways. Um I I
guess Albert Schweitzer, the physician
humanitarian, looked at African tribes
and he said cancer was extremely rare
in tribal uh human tribal populations
that lived according to ancient and
traditional ways. The init
um
very rare cancer was very rare. Native
Americans. Um, extremely rare. Cancer
became more and more common as western
diets and lifestyles entered into the um
uh into our our our societies and um
lack of exercise, poorly nutritious
food, um stress, uh sleep disorders, um
everything we have today in our society
are cancer generating events.
cancer is is linked to the obesity
epidemic. Uh we stopped smoking of
course that uh lowered the trajectory a
little bit. Um but now obesity is is
taken up the place where where smoking
took off. And and if you smoke and if
you're obese and smoke with sleep apnea,
man, you have probably uh ground zero
for some disregulated cell growth. uh
type two diabetes, obesity, all these
kinds of things cause uh inflammation
and damage chronically to the
mitochondria and the organel that
produces energy and thereby you run the
risk of getting cancer. It's not
surprising. It's absolutely predictable.
We we as a as a species
evolved in a foodrestricted environment.
We had to expend enormous amounts of
energy during Paleolithic periods uh to
track down kill animals uh dig up roots
uh whatever we tried to eat uh we had to
expend tremendous energy and none of the
foods that we were eating in those
periods of our existence were highly
processed carbohydrates.
So um it's very clear uh what's causing
this. It's the It's the mass production
of highly processed carbohydrates,
minimal exercise,
um stress, uh poor sleep. That's the
cancer lifestyle.
>> If you want to learn how to implement
the ketogenic diet and the press pulse
protocol into your cancer management,
just visit school.com/keto
forcancer, the new community by our
research analyst Johnny Rockermeer.
Within this new community platform, you
can connect with other patients and
learn from their experiences.
You can also just search through the
posts other members have already made.
You will have access to our classroom
section as well, which provides
practical advice and tools for the best
results. These sections cover all parts
of the press pulse protocol that you
should implement.
Starting with the general scientific
concepts by Dr. Thomas Ciphford. We will
show you how to start the ketogenic
diet, including which foods to choose
and which to avoid. Additionally, we
prepared a list of doctors specialized
in metabolic therapy, as well as details
about glutamine inhibition and hyperaric
oxygen protocols. So, take a look around
at school.com/ keto for cancer.
>> And it's permeated all of major western
societies. Um and uh and as the result,
I mean, this is not surprising. The the
problem is what is anybody going to do
about it? And and the answer is not
much.
>> It's an important topic for us all. And
to um to hear that we're not doing much
about it or we're not enough about it. I
mean, that brings me on um to how we're
doing with our treatment, how we're
doing with our research. We we have a
multi-billion dollar um business
internationally. We we it's an huge
employer. it's at an industrial level
terms of research and treatment and in
hospitals and uh all of the
infrastructure around cancer and
particularly around cancer research. I
mean I was looking at the numbers before
our chat um and they're they're
mindblowing the the millions in some
countries and billions in others that's
being spent in this area. But you how do
you feel we're making progress? Um and
are we making progress in any areas?
Well, you know, I don't want to say no
area, but certainly not in any ma in any
major way. Well, the death rate keeps
going up. The incidence keeps going up.
>> Um, you're right about the treatments.
Basically, they're medieval
um slashburn poison people in the name
of trying to help them. We all know
this. People fear the treatments more
than anything else. Um, I'll tell you
the the reason. And I think the most
important
role for cancer is keeping so many
people employed and and so many
industries uh generating huge revenue,
right? I mean, you just mentioned all
the billions and billions of dollars.
You know, it's amazing. People don't
seem to be they don't seem to be
outraged. They don't seem to care. Um,
okay. Everybody's making billions and
billions of dollars on sick cancer
patients and and and and we're getting
more and more cancer and more people are
dying. So for the industries, I think
it's really um when you look at the
future, it looks very bright for cancer
re uh for cancer revenue generation. um
maybe not so good for the patient uh but
certainly for the industry uh all as you
said the projections for the next 20 or
30 years are phenomenal uh the amount of
money uh that will be generated from
attempting to treat cancer patients um
mostly failures uh you know all the all
the new drugs that are coming out are
are largely failures
um and I'll tell you the reason why
we're failing uh because the theory
under which the disorder is recognized
is foundationally incorrect. It's not a
genetic disease. It's a mitochondrial
metabolic disease and it's very easily
man prevented and managed.
Um but the populations in whatever
country you're in don't care.
uh they say they care, but then they go
out and run and raise money for breast
cancer and heart uh uh lung cancer and
all this and they give the money to the
same guys perpetuating the problem.
>> Uh don't these people understand that
the more they run for cancer, breast
cancer, the more breast cancer and co or
lung cancer and all the colon cancer
you're going to get? So, all you have to
do is look at the scientific advisory
boards of all the national cancer
institutes and the private foundations
that say they're doing something and you
find out that almost every one of them
thinks cancer is a genetic disease. So,
when you're out raising money, you're
actually perpetuating the problem.
This is you people people I can't
believe we they could be so naive to
think that running for their dead
relative who died from breast cancer and
raising money for the very organization
they're perpetuating the problem is
going to solve the problem makes no
sense.
>> It makes no sense to me. There's a
question I was going to ask you
actually. It's um when you see the bake
sale um raising money for the cancer,
when you see the breast for life run um
event and I love events that get people
out active, engaging their community
like the color of pink, it's it's it's
phenomenal. But
>> um when you see the sweet counter at the
cancer research um events um they're
selling candies and sweets to raise
money for cancer. I was going to ask I
mean I think it's crazy. I take photos
of it and I I and when people ask me to
h donate over long periods of time I've
refused to donate to those type of
charities and I do not understand like
you're you're saying
>> you know what it is is what it is is a
lack of scientific literacy. What you're
dealing with is a worldwide lack of
scientific literacy. They have no clue
about evolutionary biology. if they did,
they wouldn't be doing these crazy
things.
>> Well, for me, it was simply um that
realization many years ago that sugar is
a fuel. It's an accelerant.
>> Um and then you think, well, how can you
be giving it on an oncology board and
encouraging the second piece of cake?
How can you be selling candy at your uh
research event? You're looking for that
cure everywhere. You've got your team.
You've got your um billion dollar
institute and lab set up and where where
is it? But have some sugar and we'll try
and find it for you. But we're
accelerating it. I I just it's like
>> it's a tragedy. It's a jungle. So do do
you buy the cakes? Do you do you donate?
>> Oh, it's just it's just And then you run
and give money to the very people that
are actually pushing the the false hopes
and the false information. false hope
and and it's and people are trying to do
something about it and they're raising
these funds but it's misinformed in in
my view but I'm I'm you know it's
fascinating
>> yeah that's actually
part of the problem because how can
everybody's top government's cancer
institutes be incorrect? How could all
the goodwill of these millions of people
running and jumping be
misplaced, misdirected? How is it
possible? And the answer is the lack of
scientific literacy is the re is the
reason. Um it is absolutely clear that
cancer uh is a mitochondrial metabolic
disorder. Uh okay. It's not a genetic
disease at all. And yet all of the major
therapies that are coming down carti
imunotherapy katruda opivo and vast
they're all based on the somatic
mutation theory of cancer that cancer is
a genetic disease. The National Cancer
Institute in the United States say
cancer is 100 different diseases all
controlled by different gene mutations.
Our National Cancer Institute in the
United States says this. Nothing could
be further from the truth. And the
people who have no scientific literacy,
listen to this. And then they go to the
oncologists who perpetuate the same
crap. And the next thing you know, uh,
these poor people are being brutalized.
And then they, oh, we did everything we
could. Yeah, you did everything you
could to kill the poor bastard. You
know, the the I hate to use these
terminologies, but bottom line is that
in the United States, we have 1,700
people a day dying from cancer. That's
about 70 an hour. Can you believe this?
And every night we see uh advertisements
telling everyone that if you take up and
katuda and all these different these are
based on the somatic mutation, they're
perpetuating the problem. And not only
that, some of these drugs will kill you
before the cancer does. And nobody seems
to be concerned about it. They rush off
and they say, "Oh, my doctor is so
smart. He doesn't know jack about the
biology of of the disease that he's" and
I hate. And it's not his fault. A lot of
these guys mean well. But they're in the
medical schools, they never they were
they brainwashed indoctrinated into
think cancer is a genetic disease.
Thereby these anti-angioenic and uh uh
imunotherapies seem reasonable based on
the brainwashing that the field had.
Otto Warberg had this absolutely correct
centuries ago. We have validated in our
research program here at Boston College
exactly what Warberg said except that he
didn't know about another fermentation
fuel that we now know about which is the
fermentation of glutamine an amino acid
fermentation. I published this. I we
have it hard scientific evidence, but
you know those monkeys, they don't want
to hear about stuff. They don't want to
look about stuff. Um that's the way the
field is. They're so comfortable in the
status quo of making enormous amounts of
money on the status quo. Nobody wants to
change this. And then the poor cancer
patient is led around by their nose with
a ring in it to this guy to that guy.
And they're br and there by the grace of
God they survive brutal uh med medieval
treatments and and then if they survive
they they have to then oftentimes not
always they have to be confronted by all
kinds of secondary ailments uh for
having survived brutal poisonous and
radiation and surgical mutilations. Um
but everybody seems to be okay with it.
Um uh I don't know what it is. It's like
a world messmerization, tranquilization
of the brain. It's like when the hell
are you people going to understand this
is a metabolic disease and you have a
lot of control over both prevention and
treatment.
>> That's well that's a a key point as well
that we do have a lot of control. So the
numbers we're talking you you mentioned
the death rates um there daily deaths in
the US. I mean the the figures are
frightening. um 20 million cases in 2022
worldwide uh new cases and that's
predicted to go up by 77%
um by uh in by 2050. Um figures I mean
the death rate is is insane and the
breakthroughs and the new treatments are
not not touching that despite the
billions and billions of of dollars. So,
but I think that point is really really
fascinating that you're saying that we
do have a lot of control over our risk
of getting cancer, but also in um we
have more options in terms of um
managing cancer as well. Um and so so
we'll we'll come on to your approach,
but you've mentioned Otto Wahberg a few
times and I I've looked at him and he's
been mentioned in your talks a number of
times and in in other people's talks,
Dom Dastino. Um, and he's he's a he's a
person who in the 20s he's a fascinating
character by the sounds of it. Uh, but
20s and 30s he was prolific with his
science research and came upon this
theory. Um, didn't come up he he
researched it and um it was something to
do with sea urchins. But can you tell us
a bit more about the theory and then
what's happened to it? Have we neglected
it completely for example in training
our medical students?
>> Yeah. Well, um, yeah, Warberg was
fascinated with cancer early early in
his career, um, in the 1920s. Uh, but,
you know, he made some, um, errors, um,
that we now know, uh, were made. He was
obsessive about quantification of data,
collection, measurements. He was a
meticulous me person who could measure
stuff. Um so he studied energy
metabolism in in normal uh tissue and in
sea urchins and uh these kinds of things
and characterized how energy is produced
in normal uh uh uh cells and tissues
from normal from organisms that that
were normal did not have cancer. So he
felt quite competent in his
understanding of energy metabolism.
And then uh he realized that oxygen was
the uh driver of of majority of energy.
And um he noticed in all of his tumor
cells and tissues that oxygen
consumption was always lower in the
tumor tissue than in the normal tissue.
And he always noticed that the
production of a fermentation waste
product which was lactic acid was always
higher in the tumor tissue than in the
normal tissue. And he knew that if if
oxygen was deprived of normal tissue,
they also produced um this waste product
called lactic acid. As a matter of fact,
when you run um fast, you build up
lactic acid because the the muscles
can't generate there they work so fast
that the amount of oxygen is
insufficient
uh for generating ATP adenosine
triphosphate which is the chemical
currency of energy. So they had to fall
back and on a fermentation pathway which
is energy without oxygen and lactic acid
is the indicator of energy without
oxygen. Also when you when people have a
heart attack when you stop breathing
because your heart starts pumping your
bloodstream fills up not only with
lactic acid but also with a second waste
product uh of fermentation which is
suinic acid. These are acids
uh that are wasted dumped into the
bloodstream because they cannot be
effectively metabolized for energy
because the oxygen that facilitates this
is now uh restricted because of the
heart attack. So it was known for years
that when you have a heart attack,
lactic acid and suinic acid uh build up
because oxygen is not there to serve as
an an acceptor of electrons to drive the
synthesis of ATP.
um uh Warberg and others knew that
cancer cells even in 100% oxygen
continue to throw out this waste
product. And now we're realizing cancer
cells also throw out suinic acid. Um
suinic acid is a is a waste product of
amino acid fermentation and we have now
shown that that amino acid which
everybody thought was respired is
actually fermented. So cancer cells are
telling us by their waste the by the
release of waste products exactly what's
going on inside the cell. They're
telling us
clearly the cancer cell is telling us
we're we're suffocating. We can't get
energy from oxygen but we can get energy
from fermentation uh using these
fermentable fuels which essentially is
glucose. glucose the sugar is
metabolized normally to CO2 and water
but in cancer cells that process is
broken and you get lactic acid in the in
the bloodstream outside the cell and
whatever and now we know suinic acid
which is indication of a amino acid
fermentation the cancer cell is telling
us exactly what it's doing to stay alive
it's fermenting it's using fuels that
don't require oxygen it's telling us in
no uncertain terms If you want to kill
me, you have to take away my fermentable
fuels. We have tried this in our press
pulse therapeutic strategy for managing
cancer and our mouse and humans and it
works. Um the problem is the entire
cancer industry is locked into the
thinking it's a genetic disorder. So why
waste any time with energy or any of the
stuff that I'm saying that Warberg said?
Why why waste time? It's a genetic. So
the you're brainwashed into thinking the
disorder is something other than what it
actually is. But it's very profitable to
think that. So you have to understand
that cancer as a disease is extremely
profitable. The status quo will be held.
Why would you want to tra change to to
to target the two fuels driving the
disregulated cell growth which can be
done very cheaply and very effectively
without toxicity? Uh why do you want to
do that? You're going to upset the apple
cart uh of of profitability for this
whole thing. We've trained all these
physicians and medical schools
throughout the world to think cancer is
a genetic disease. All of the top cancer
centers throughout the western world are
all focused on the same crazy stuff. All
based on an incorrect theory. This goes
back. You want to know this? the the the
the parallelism of what we're dealing
today uh uh from the past. For 1,00 over
1,800 years, the the people uh thought
that the earth was immovable in the
center of the solar system for 1,800
years. Capernacus, Kepler, and Galileo
came along with hard scientific evidence
and said, "No, the Earth moves and it's
one of the one of the number of planets
that circles the sun. The sun is it took
1,800 years and they attacked the
scientists thought it was okay, but the
Bible said it cannot be okay. Can you
imagine this? Falling back on some crazy
stuff written in a Bible thinking I'm
sorry if I piss people off. The bottom
line, it's not a scientific
documentation. You got to you got to get
over it. But yet yet crazy stuff like
that inhibits our ability to move
forward as a rational thinking species
that we are. So, we're locked in now to
thinking that cancer is a genetic
disease. Okay? So, when you have a
genetic disease and you everybody's
making profit on it and you think you're
going to solve the problem, you're not
solving the problem. People are going to
die and suffer. And it's so convenient.
Our technology uh uh has outpaced our
biology. We have automobiles. We don't
have to walk and harvest. We have sit in
tractors to harvest food. We're not
working as hard as we used to when we
were farmers. Uh we we had a lot more
energy, a lot more nutritious foods. Now
we're all the world is locked into mass
distribution of of of highly processed
foods uh that have long shelf life. Some
of it's genetically engineered. Obesity
is rampant everywhere. And then you're
wondering why we have a cancer problem.
I mean, what's going on here? You tell
me. I mean, listen, I've been around for
a while. You know, uh I I've looked at a
lot of in my life, but there's
nothing greater than the amount of
in this whole cancer industry.
And as long as people are comfortable
with it, as long as they feel that
they're being treated effectively by the
system, then status quo will maintain
and and nothing's going to change. So,
how many people are going to become
scientifically literate? How many people
are going to understand what's driving
their disregulated cell growth? and
what's more important what they can do
as an individual to both prevent cancer
and as well as as facilitate the
treatment once they were be would be
diagnosed with it. A a cancer cell is a
cell that's dividing and it's built up
certain mistakes in its genetics in its
genes and then it proliferates. Um but
it's doing that all of them there's lots
of different types of cancer but
underneath all of that they need like
any cell in the body they need fuel. Um
otherwise they they can't do that. they
they can't continue to live like and
they grow um at a large rate and they're
they're hungry for fuel, very very
hungry, which is why when you um they're
looking for cancer, they they use
something called a PET scan and the body
will light up areas will light up of the
body where potential cancer growth is
because that those cells in the body are
using or sucking in much more uh glucose
than than other cells. So that's that's
so we've known about the link for sugar
um for a very very long time. I uh in
preparation for this um chat with you
Thomas I I put out a few different polls
on different groups um that I I run and
um also on Facebook groups and um asked
for some feedback about what um causes
cancer to grow. Uh and they the vast
majority of people said sugar and uh
lots of people talked about processed
foods uh and and other things came in
you know talking about stress and um
lack of exercise lack of sleep you know
good good kind of health generally but
in terms of fueling cancer it's very
well known in the wider population that
sugar processed food is a is a problem
but then we do have an dissonance where
we'll then eat it and we'll bite it at a
cancer
um tea tea morning tea party to raise
money to find it. So we we have this
crazy dissonance, but you're you're
talking about a theory that that's I
think it's really really important to
kind of just get clear that um that
since that theory of Warberg that came
out in the 20s and 30s and he he he won
a Nobel um prize for his research.
>> It was for the discovery of cytochrome
C. It's the uh it's the protein in the
in the in the mitochondria that uh
allows the cell to get energy from
oxygen.
>> And and his theory um then has become
neglected. This theory of how a cancer
cell is is fueled. And and it's really
important because while we're off busy
with our billions and our scientists and
our labs and all of our technology
looking for the cure for individual um
genetic components of different um
cancers as they and and they change and
there's multiple factors in each cancer.
We you're saying we have an Achilles
heel really to cancer as a whole where
we can take cancer down by taking away
the fuel it needs and and it dies
without it or at least it's um extremely
damaged. Um and and so there's I mean
there's twofold you could potentially
kill cancer with your your theory uh in
a less toxic way than we're currently
managing less damaging to the body. um
which is just amazing to hear. Um but
also for those cancers that we maybe
can't kill in their entirety, we we
could maybe use the other treatments
that we have developed over time, but
we'd need less um toxicity in the body.
We we'd need to do less damage to the
body. So it's fascinating how this
Achilles heel um isn't being utilized at
all. and and you're saying you're not
you you know you I mean you've been
working on looking at your research
papers I mean you've got many different
research papers over the decades you've
worked in cancer research and before
that um epilepsy as well and um as a
researcher but you you've been talking
about this specific theory looking at
papers that you've written in I was
looking at papers you've written in 2010
12 14 presentations you've given um you
know decades of telling us about this
theory with all of these millions and
billions floating around for research.
It's it's absolutely amazing that that
this hasn't been taken seriously and
more more research isn't being done.
>> Yeah. Well, that's that's that's the
great headscratcher, the great mystery.
But it's not it's not a mystery. Um,
when you have an ideology, look at look
at all all the people, not all, but many
many many of the folks that are pushing
all these billions and type of research
and gene pro
sequencing and all this, they're all
indoctrinated. They think cancer is a
genetic disease and when you tell them
it's not, they walk away. Um, you can't
get a person of one religion to drop the
religion and immediately embrace another
religion. You can't do that because the
brain has been indoctrinated. Um once
you're indoctrinated into a world view,
uh almost nothing can can change the way
you think. And um um you know the the
somatic mutation theory which is the
current theory driving uh the all of the
research major not all a majority of the
research in all the different countries
at least the major academic grants at
least the treatments that are being
pushed in the hospitals uh are all
extremely expensive and they're not
working for the majority of people. I
mean, they keep you alive another two or
three months in a miserable a miserable
state. Um, and you pay a lot of money
for this. Um, and they're all saying,
"Oh, no. This next cl this is immoral.
What the what the field is doing to
people is actually immoral. They're
treating people with with therapies that
are based on an incorrect theory." It's
one thing to say, "I'm profoundly
ignorant. I didn't know what Seaff Freed
was saying." It's another thing to say
that I know what he's saying, but I'm
sorry I can't do it. then you're immoral
because that that tells you you're
you're you're just doing it for the
money. You're not doing it to help
anybody and and or you choose not to
look at the evidence. I mean you you
want to know when you when you stop
oxidative phosphorilation you die quick.
Everything is energy. Uh that's why when
you drink when somebody would drink
cyanide or take cyanide which is a a
blocker of oxidative phosphor you die
very quickly. They call it drinking the
Kool-Aid because it was laced with
cyanide. And people drink this Kool-Aid
laced with cyanide. You die very quick.
Cancer cells don't die in cyanide. They
live in they can live and produce energy
in cyanide because they're not using
oxygen as a fuel. I mean, if that's not
a wakeup call, uh why don't they
understand that? Now, the other thing is
they can't burn fatty acids and ketone
bodies. Uh we have a big paper we just
published showing that all the cancer
cells accumulate fatty acids in big
lipid droplets in the cytoplasm because
if they try to burn the they'll they'll
die so they store them as a protective
mechanism because they can't burn them.
So that tells you right there you want
to manage cancer, you lower the blood
sugar uh uh you target the glutamine
gingerly and you raise uh you put your
body into a state of nutritional ketosis
uh which is low sugar elevated ketones
and fatty acids and the tumor cells will
get hammered uh and they'll slowly
degrade and yes uh as you mentioned yes
at the very end of the treatment we may
need a little bit a touch of radiation
here a t a small amount of chemo there
or maybe one of those imunotherapies
here uh as a final cleansing to get rid
of the few straggling tumor cells that
may be hanging around that's actually
survived metabolic therapy. But why is
metabolic therapy not first and foremost
as the as the as the treatment protocol
for every cancer patient? We have not
found a tumor anywhere and I have looked
deeply and I published papers on this
that can survive without the the glucose
and the glutamine. So as long as you can
target those two fuels and transition
the body over to a fuel the tumor cells
can't use, they choke on it, then you
know how to kill cancer and manage I
just told you the the solution to the
cancer problem and of just a few words.
And then you'll go to go down and go to
your top medical schools and tell them
what you just heard and they'll say no
clinical trials. Oh, I didn't hear that.
How come nobody ever told me about
because you don't read the damn
literature like I do. So, so um and
others and it's a hard nut to crack and
I you know, you got a whole uh
international industry based on this
false impression that cancer is a
genetic disease. How's that working out
for the majority of people on the
planet?
>> Not good, right?
>> Okay. I just told you the solution to
the problem and then tomorrow you're
going to see all these folks out there
running for breast cancer, colon cancer,
raising money for the very institution
that's putting them in that's that's
keep maintaining the status quo. Uh also
all the cancers are very similar. You're
right. Achilles heels they can't they
they're locked into a fermentation
metabolism. They can't they can't uh get
out of that. Their oxidative energy is
is def and that's breast color. All the
major cancers have the same problem. All
of them have different genetic profiles.
Every major cancer and cells within the
tumor all have different genetic
mutations. So why are we spending all
our time targeting the unique
differences that that differ from every
cell rather than what all the cells have
in common? They're all fermenttors. They
all can't. So this makes no sense to me.
I go nuts. I said, "What's going on with
these people?
>> What am I I might as well be talking to
the plug socket over there on the wall
because the response I get from the plug
socket is no different than what I get
from the NCI." So, um, it's like, what
is going on? Is everybody tranquilized?
Uh, they're like zombies out there. I
mean, I don't know what's going on.
It's it's one of the great mysteries of
life. Why doesn't somebody figure out
that?
>> If it if it wasn't so cruel to us, it
would be funny the
missing. But, and but
>> this is what we call we call this we
call it gallows humor. You know, we're
talking about the lives of we're talking
about the lives of millions of people
worldwide that are being brutalized by
by a system that's happy with the status
quo and people are contributing money to
the status quo as if something's going
to change. It ain't going to change.
>> As long as they continue as long as they
continue to think cancer is a genetic
disease, we're going to have uh uh the
death rate will be much higher. The
incidence of cancer will be much
greater. And as I said, well, people
really interested in preventing cancer.
You'd very rarely find an obese person
walking around. Don't they know that
obesity puts you at super high risk for
cancer, sleep apnea, obesity, type 2
diabetes? The the governments of the of
the world aren't telling people that uh
you're putting our uh your lives at
risk. However, it's extremely profitable
industry that supports a lot of the
success of industrialized uh countries.
But there's got to be some in between uh
where people can do better and somebody
can still make a profit uh on this. Uh
there has to be some we're not saying
well let's throw out all everything we
know about what we're doing but let's
make sure that it's related to the
theory that drives the disregulated cell
growth which is a shift from oxidative
phosphorilation to substrate level
phosphorilation in technical terms is
what I just gave you. It's that that's
the that's the the problem here. But you
know, yeah, after a while I get
frustrated. I talk to these people like
millions of people. Oh, wow. This guy
really thinks and then they go to their
oncology and get slapped down like like
this guy understands what's going on,
right? I mean, look at the Do we have
1,700 people, all these dead people?
Obviously, somebody know doesn't know
what's happening.
>> So, could you tell us about the two
fuels and uh how we're getting them and
what we can do about them? you've
mentioned your process to to tackle this
and it's a two-fold system, isn't it?
Um, but the reason I mentioned fatty
acids was because um people have said
and and um that that cancer is I mean
it's a um it it may look for a different
um fuel after those two uh if we tackle
take away those two fuels. So fatty
acids is not an option.
>> No, I I tested it. We tested it. We
looked at all that's what I'm saying.
All major cancers store fatty acids in
lipid droplets in the cytoplasm. Now the
absurdity of the field, they say, "Oh,
the fatty acids are there because
they're needed as fuel." No, they're
not. When the mitochondria become
dysfunctional, immediately fatty acids
accumulate in the cytoplasm of the cell.
That means they're not being used. They
can't be used. Um, people say, "Oh, some
cancers can use fatty acids." No, they
can't. I tested this. I looked at it.
These are the people that don't think
carefully. They don't read the
scientific litter, nor do they
understand it. We can't find any tumor
cell that can grow on fatty acids or
ketone bodies in the absence of glucose
and glutamine. The two the other two
fuels are always present. So when you
add fatty acids and you have these
glucose and glutamine, uh the tumor cell
um actually can grow sometimes faster,
but it's it's because the fatty acids
are facilitating the use of the glucose
and glutamine.
It's not because the fatty acids are if
you take away glucose and glutamine and
give the tumor cell fatty acids, it
drops dead. It dies. You can't use the
fatty acids. So I looked into this. We
have papers published on this. But guess
what? They don't want to read these
paper. And if they do, they have they
they can't they they ignore it's clear
and I I throw I throw out there, show me
cells that can survive on fatty acids
when glucose and glutamine are not in
the mix, right? And nobody. So why don't
you target the two fuels that are
absolutely essential for the
disregulated cell growth. Now the
glutamine of course is an amino acid
that's absolutely essential for our
immune system, our gut, and a lot of
other things. So you can't be stupid
about how to target glutamine. You got
to know how to be you got to be
strategic. And how do you become
strategic strategic? You understand the
biology and biochemistry of the problem
you're dealing with. You don't want to
harm your gut. You don't want to
paralyze your immune system because you
need the these things to be healthy and
to kill cancer cells. So you really need
to understand biology. And if you don't
understand the biology of organ systems,
cell bi different kinds of cells, how
they operate, how they evolved, what
they do, then you don't really
understand how to manage the disease.
You got to know all that in a complete
package. And unfortunately, the medical
students are not trained to think like
this. They're never exposed to the
information that I'm sharing with you,
right? They go into the medical school,
they're told cancer is a genetic
disease. we need to poison surgically
surgically take out chunks of somebody's
tissue. I mean, we're not saying surgery
is is not involved, but if we shrink the
tumor down to the size of a of a a wart
when it was much bigger and the surgeon
can come out come in and and debulk it
or remove it very very very cleanly
without causing major harm, then that's
good. And that's what we think can
happen. Not what they're doing today. uh
going in there. We had to we can shrink
those tumors down real small with
metabolic therapy and then and get and
get rid of them. But you also have to
realize which people need to know that
they become a major participant in the
management of their disease. They're no
longer some uh st bystander in the whole
process. This whole concept of someone
I'm battling they're battling their
disease. No, they're not. They're
sitting there being nuked and poisoned
and they not they don't have any any
relying on the doctors. We got 1,700
people a day relying on these guys. 70
an hour being brutalized. Yeah. It's not
like dying from heart attack. Cancer you
die you die miserably because you've
been your body is so beat up from the
medieval treatments that they're giving
you. And each one oh we have a new
clinical trial all based on the semantic
mutation theory. More dead people come
in and I mean it's just one of the it'll
go down. No question. Mark me. I won't
live to see it. This this cancer thing
will be the greatest tragedy in the
history of medicine. Bar none. Bar none.
Because we know how to manage the
disease effectively without toxicity.
And nobody is very few people. I don't
know of a single clinical trial or
hospital anywhere on the planet that is
simultaneously targeting glucose and
glutamine while transitioning the body
off to nutritional ketosis. Just not
there. And I just told you the solution
to the cancer problem and nobody's doing
it. So what do you say? Oh, I must be
wrong because the status uh because
confirmation bias everybody knows cancer
is a genetic disease. Who's this crazy
guy telling us it's not a genetic
disease? You'll come to know someday.
So in terms of the research that's going
on and I mean you have referred to in
some of your talks you've referred to um
colleagues around the world
internationally maybe in Turkey or
inbull um uh and other institutes um
that are doing part of this process is
tackling cancer as a metabolic disease
not perhaps with the full process um the
twofold process um in in the particular
>> um dose and order that you that you know
you we we'd like to see that um your
your um uh process your approach carried
out. But who who is doing what in this
area in terms of treating cancer as a
metabolic disease, not a genetic
disease, which is the differentiation
you're talking about?
>> Well, first of all, you have to realize
that we put these billions and billions
of dollars into the genome projects, the
cancer genome project with the hope of
precalized medicine, precision and
precision therapies. uh this was
supposed to eliminate the medieval
radiation and poisonous chemicals. The
reason why we continue with radiation
and poisonous chemicals is because the
hope of the genome projects never
materialized despite the billions and
billions of dollars. So we must stay
with the medieval procedures. So now we
bring in new therapies based on the
genome which is the imunotherapies. They
sound very sexy. Wow. Precision
medicine. We're going to use uh Opivo,
Katruda, Carti, and all these kinds of
things that are going to go in
strategically. Yeah. If you have a
cancer cell where all of the markers on
the surface are similar and the
imunotherapy targets that uh you could
potentially uh end up uh with a
resolution of the cancer. The problem is
many of your normal tissues and organs
have that same epitope and uh you can
blow out your liver, your kidneys,
cardiovascular you got you can do a lot
of damage to your body uh by by by by
using some of the some of the we call it
hyper progressive disease where the
treatment of the the treatment causes
the death of the patient faster than the
cancer would if you didn't do anything
to it.
>> So go ask about hyperprogressive
disease. It's well documented in the
scientific literature. They don't talk
about it. Uh but they do I don't know
about Australia but in the United States
we advertise all these cancer therapies
on television. All right. But they do
they spend about about 20% of the of the
advertisement is telling you how
wonderful this drug is and about 80%
they're telling you how it was going to
how it can kill you um in so many
different ways. Uh so they're not hiding
anything. They're clearly the the the
the companies that are making these
drugs are clearly telling you that
there's a good probability you're going
to be dead from the drug that we think
is going to help you. So they're not
hiding anything. But people Oh, okay.
Okay. Then they they go down and this is
what I talk when you talk about
scientifically. If you're not if you're
scientifically illiterate, then you have
no clue what these guys are telling you.
But they're not hiding anything. They're
telling you this drug is could
potentially kill you. Why would you
treat anybody with anything that has a
potential and metabolic therapy won't
kill you? And the only problem is it
gets rid of your diabetes, your high
blood pressure, hypertension along with
the cancer. So um I mean one of the
those are the collateral effects of
metabolic therapy. Not only do you get
rid of your cancer, you get rid of a lot
of other things that that are linked to
a chronic diet lifestyle. The the of
course no we don't want that. God forbid
that gets out and people start using
that. You know,
what are you talking about? This is
nuts. This is like heresy here. So um
but any event you know when you
understand the biology and you spend
decades and decades understanding cell
and physi uh systems biology and what
Warberg said and I tracked down
everything
translated his papers from German to
English and had big stu student
discussions about this find out where he
made his mistakes how we cleared it up
and we're moving forward now uh with a
very clear plan uh of how to manage
cancer without toxicity the press pulse
therapeutic strategy
uh was I wrote it as with some of my
Dominic Diagust and uh Joe Maroon and
and George U. You know, it's a framework
uh for the eventual standard of care for
cancer patients. Um yeah, do the cancer
patients have to shoulder a lot of the a
lot of the burden of their treatment?
Yes. They have to become empowered.
They're not no they're no longer
bystanders. And and what we see is that
those folks that understand the science
and take a deep dive into what they're
doing and why they're doing it, they do
good. Um they they really do well. Uh
the patients who say, "Well, I'm not
really want I don't really want to bring
myself into ketosis, blah blah blah."
They're finished. They should go and do
the radiation and chemo. Um you know,
forget about it. And hey, listen, you
can drag the the the the horse to the
the the water, but you can't force him
to drink. They always say things like
that. But but the bottom line is that
the patient who is engaged and and
understands the concepts do the best
with metabolic therapy. Um you know, I'm
not saying, you know, we have millions
of cancer survivors from just the
standard treatments, but as I told you
before, they pay a big price for this. I
mean, they have all kinds of adverse and
health problems. They have gut issues.
They have hormonal issues,
neuroscychiatric problems, bone density
issues. And bottom line, they don't live
long. They don't live as long as they
could, even if they survive cancer. And
sometimes those cancers come back at
you. Oh, it's a recurrent tumor. What do
you mean it's a recurrent tumor? Man,
you should you should have uh put that
fire out a long time ago. And then of
course, when you try to do metabolic
therapy after your body has been beat to
hell by poison and radiation and
surgical mutilations, you've already
taken the advant advantage away from
your body. It's an incredible healing
machine. It's an incredible healing
machine. You got to allow your body to
heal that and you got to work with your
own cell, the normal cells because the
normal cells then actually engage uh
with the cancer cells. They facilitate
this. They indirect starvation of the
tumor cells because the normal cells
will suck up those fuels before the
tumor cell gets them. And then and if
you have a healthy body, uh your body
will actually work together with
metabolic therapy to attack and dissolve
the tumors. Can you believe this? It's
called autoolytic cannibalism where the
body turns on the tumor and uses the the
the the the metabolites inside the tumor
to fuel the rest of the body. So you
again, you need to know the biology of
the systems, evolutionary biology and
all this kind of stuff if you really
want to manage your cancer. um you just
can't rely you can't take your precious
soul and turn it over to an
establishment that uh has a
misunderstanding
uh of the very nature of the disorder
that you have. So and a consequently
it's an ep it's a worldwide uh problem
not going away. People better wise up
and unless they don't care. If they
don't care then what are you going to
do?
>> Well I think they do care. It's just
overwhelming. And we have a history, a
long history of putting our trust in our
doctor, in our specialist, in our
hospitals, in our government, and well,
almost particularly in those large
institutions that that have done the
evidence, they've done this um research
for us. And we we as a as populations,
you know, that is the history. And then
people who are coming into this uh you
know because they have a family member
or themselves have a diagnosis then
there's so much to research there's you
know so much is thrown at them you know
you you're given the advice about how
this is going to be treated you're
looking up those treatments you know
terminology that's new to you
medications that's new new um looking up
alternatives and then the alternative um
field is just uh another you know huge
bag and different protocols. It's you
know it's an enormous learning curve.
>> But how is that working out? How is the
trust? We we need to trust our we our
governments are are absolutely fantastic
in many things and in some forms of
medical treatment like cardiovascular
disorder. They've made in orthopedics
and they made enormous advances. We're
not claiming that all of these guy we're
talking specifically about cancer. Uh
we're not talking about the massive
achievements and and wonderful advances
they've made in other fields of
medicine. We're not we're not talking
about that. We're talking about this one
specific disease called cancer. And and
it's and it's it's two theories are
driving the research and the treatment.
And one is called the somatic mutation
theory and the other called is the
mitochondrial metabolic theory.
initially started by Otto Warberg and
now we advance this concept and others
are are recognizing. There's a lot of
people that recognize this. The problem
is it's not being implemented in
clinical trials the correct way. It's
not filtering down to the hospitals that
should be treating their patients this
way. those hospitals are based on on the
drugs and the power of the
pharmaceutical industries to continue to
push uh this nonsense. And as I said,
we've got 1,700 people a day in the
United States dying and it's getting
worse and worse every year. So something
unless you're unless you're comfortable
with the status quo, unless you think
you understand cancer, then don't do
anything. Don't listen to what I'm
saying. Just ignore me. Don't wish you
never heard what I'm saying. Go back go
back and read Ida Worerberg or something
like this. You know, it's just I'm just
telling you I'm the one I'm I'm the
messenger telling you where if you want
to get your self in order and manage
cancer, you got to consider metabolic
therapy and and a blended therapies. And
yet your oncologists if they don't know
about this and the other the other
problem is many of the oncologists would
love to do this. I'm on the but they
can't. the system prevents them. They
have to do a standard of care first,
which is radiation, chemo, and all this.
Why? Why do they have to do that? It's
not working for the majority of people.
And if it does work, these poor folks
pay a price for it. So, why do they not
want to do this? Because it's a
disruptive technology. Status quo is
where it's at, baby. And you got to stay
with the status quo.
And you've been in other fields where
we've had to use a status quo like
epilepsy before we could use metabolic.
>> Yeah, that was another thing. Um, you
know, we knew Wilder from 1921
realized that um ketogenic diets, he he
actually was fasting people who had
epilepsy and and the seizures went away.
But, you know, you can only fast
somebody for so long before you kill
them. So he said, "Let's do a ketogenic
diet and see if we could recreate the
metabolic uh biology of of of what goes
on during water only fasting." And that
was a widely used treatment until drugs
came along uh in the 1930s, various
anti-cancer drugs. And you know, my
colleagues at John's Hopkins were
arguing we should be doing uh ketogenic
metabolic therapy on little kids first
before we give them pharmacy. Oh yeah,
how do you think that went over? Not
good. So even today when you go to the
epilepsy now there's ketogenic diet
epilepsy for little kids and then the
other people in the cancer field you
hear people say oh that ketogenic diet
is very dangerous you got to be careful
what's treating th thousands and
thousands of little kids around the
around the globe with ketogenic diets
for epilepsy and now all of a sudden you
have cancer and it's dangerous what
relative to radiation and chemo I mean
people don't think give me a break I
mean give me a break you're going to be
irdiated and poisoned and you think
that's more not as harmful as as as just
switching your diet. I mean, give me a
break. I mean, this is unbelievable. But
but when people are told
>> when people have very little
scientifically illiterate, they're
willing to believe all all of these guys
thinking they you put a nice white coat
on and a tie and you sit in a nice
office, guy must know what he's talking
about. And in many cases, they do, but
not mostly not in the cancer field.
>> That's I mean, it's a stark warning to
get ourselves informed. um all the way
along. Now, when I was um growing up, my
grandma was diagnosed with cancer and at
that time in the ' 90s, early 90s um you
didn't even really talk much about
cancer. It was a bit of a um the word
was um was a bit taboo still. Uh and and
I I don't know how many were predicted
to get cancer at that time, but um then
later on, a decade or so later, it was
one in four and and now one in two of
us. and the the increase that's
predicted that I mentioned earlier of
like 77% new cases predicted over the
next decades. It's just we are going in
the wrong direction. So what is the
pathway forward? We've got these these
opposing theories. Genetics is has has
led the way for decades. Everything all
our infrastructure but also our
treatment protocols and our treatments
are built around a theory that's based
on the genetics of your specific type of
cancer. Nobody is tackling and taking
away the fuel that feeds your cancer.
And and I've, you know, even more so,
I've heard you say that some of these
treatments actually ex exacerbate by
accelerating because they're they're um
the, you know, propelling um uh glucose
and glutamine to the cancer cell, which
is absolutely um just so shocking when I
I heard you talking on those matters.
You know, I know you'll hear me talking
on a lot because I I I I live, sleep,
and eat this stuff. I I I I look I read
the scientific literature and I look and
I compare and contrast and I do this all
the time, day and night. And and and
you're right, the frustration is
unbelievable. I mean, you irdiate
somebody, the blood sugar goes through
the roof. Your body is under threat.
Whenever you're under threat, your
hormones turn on. you make because you
feel like you're going to be, you know,
you need to the fightlight response and
and you poison people and and glutamine
is going up and I mean it's like nuts.
Uh uh and I see this and then they say,
"Oh, you know, we did everything we
could to save you everything you did to
kill the poor guy, you know, without
your knowing it and thinking and the
problem is you think you're doing good."
This is the crazy stuff. So, um why is
the why is the medical because they're
not trained. They're not told what I'm
They don't read the scientific
literature like I do. They don't know
the biology like I do. Okay. When you
know the biology and you read the
scientific literature, it becomes very
clear what's driving the disregulated
cell growth.
>> Are you passionate about the
groundbreaking and heroic research of
Dr. Thomas Ciphford on metabolic therapy
and cancer? So are we. That's why we've
created something special for you in
collaboration with Johnny Rocker, a
German book publisher and translator.
Introducing our collection of
meticulously crafted books that distill
the essence of Dr. Safe Reed's work.
Dive into the science and discoveries.
These summary books are your gateway to
understanding the intricate world of
metabolic ketogenic therapy in a clear,
concise, and engaging way. Whether
you're new to the subject or a seasoned
enthusiast, our books offer insights
that can change your life. Ready to
explore this transformative knowledge?
Visit our website at www.cancer as a
metabolic disease.com to get your copy.
You can buy the ebook there directly and
the paper book via the provided links.
Here's the best part. A portion of every
purchase goes directly to support Dr.
Thomas Safereed's groundbreaking
research. That's why the direct ebook
purchase is the best option to donate as
much as possible. You can see all of the
donations Mr. Rocker Meyer has already
made at www ketoforcancer.net.
That's right. When you buy our books,
you're not just investing in your own
knowledge, you're also contributing to
the future of cancer research. Help us
make a difference. Together, we can
drive change and save lives.
>> And we've looked in this. We've
interrogated cancer cells to find out
exactly what they need to grow and they
need these two fuels and you're right a
lot of the treatments they give you
especially for brain tumors glyopblasto
I mean there we have not made one single
advance in a in a hundred years in brain
in glyopblasto
I tell people you know you got the web
telescope a million miles from earth
looking at the origin of the universe
and you're telling me we have not made
one advance in saving people's lives in
in 1926 the brain cancer death survival
was 8 to 14 months. In 2024
it's 8 to 16 months. What are you
kidding me? Why? Because you're doing
the same stupid thing you've been doing
for decades without changing anything.
And you don't want to hear anything new
about the biology of the problem. It's
extremely profitable to treat
glyobblasto by standard of care. I don't
want to change that. And yet we
slaughter all these poor people. You
know, it's like, give me a break. I
mean, at some point, somebody's going to
have to say something.
>> Mhm.
>> And I don't want people to to think that
I'm coming here with a cure for cancer.
Cure is an arrogant term. We have no
clue whether metabolic therapy is going
to cure you. We know it's not going to
kill you, but we have no idea whether if
you're still if you were cancer
diagnosed in your 40s and you die in 96
years old from a heart attack, then you
obviously were cured. The cancer never
came back. Um but but metabolic like
Pablo Kelly from Devon, England, uh he
has a glyobblasto and he's just is now
he's out 10 years this month uh with
survival. Is he? No, his cancer is still
there in his brain. He has it cut out
every three or four years. Um, but it's
growing very slow and it's indolent. Had
he done standard of care, he would have
been dead years ago. So, we're not
saying that metabolic therapy will
cancer. We're just saying metabolic
therapy offers you an alternative for
managing your cancer. You should have
the choice to choose that path or go for
standard of care or what whatever you
think. It should be the patient's choice
rather than this s the system which has
a failed track record telling you what
you should do. It'd be one thing if they
had great success, but how's 1700 people
a day dying from cancer in the how is
that considered success? Like you like
you said, Claire, look at the how many
people are supposed to die from this in
the coming years based based on what
we're doing.
>> This is failed. This is a failure of
monumental proportions. So people better
get on better start recognizing all I'm
doing is I'm the messenger. I'm just
telling you, you know, you you you got
to start thinking about about how all
this works. Otherwise, you're going to
be a statistic.
>> Going back to your risk then um before
um a diagnosis, I mean the the the
number of us that will be diagnosed in
our lifetime now due to our lifestyle
predominantly rather than our genetics.
um which we we can say safely with that
90 to 95% of um cancers are actually um
based that they're they're caused by
environmental factors rather than
genetic factors which I think is a big
misconception. I don't know what you
think. I think a lot of the public and
now you know in the establishment talk
talk obviously about the genetic
components and I read more and more and
more about that. But there's a lot we
can do ourselves isn't there um to
prevent diagnosis. Well, what we did
with the well, there's two types of
genetics. There's germline inheritance
uh where you can inherit a risk factor
from one generation to the next. And
then there's the somatic mutations which
occur in the cancer cell as it as it
develops and those mutations in the in
the nucleus of the tumor cell
somatically come from the damage to the
oxidative phosphorilation system in the
mitochondria. So they're effects but
brack one mutation and leaf many and
these inherited u genes that people say
oh it's a genetic disease yeah but how
does it no cancer can happen without
damage to oxidative phosphorilation uh
chronic and we found that every major
risk genetic risk factor uh damages
oxidative phosphorilation putting that
cancer on the on the path to shift to
fermentation. So even the even the
genetic risk factor and none of them are
100% penetrint meaning that there's no
gene that when you have it you're
destined to have the disease. The
highest is leaf rameni with about 80% uh
but there's no 100% not like
Huntington's disease and some of these
other uh diseases that are 100%
penetrate not cancer. So cancer is
predominantly
u an environmental lifestyle problem uh
causing damage to the ability of a cell
in a particular tissue uh to shift from
oxidative phosphorilation to substrate
level phos or fermentation basically. So
so um these are the things that that you
need you need to know and how to prevent
that you here's the situation. It's very
very difficult to get cancer if you keep
your mitochondria healthy. Okay? People
should know what the mitochondria of the
cell is because that's their destiny.
That determines how long you will live
on the planet. Mitochondrial health is
what allows us the longevity that we
have. And all species have a particular
lifespan. Right? People think that oh
you know when we were in the Paleolithic
period most of our ancestors over the we
as a species for for over a million
years uh what killed us was injury and
infections not cancer type 2 diabetes
you know we died from infections because
we had no v vaccines and we died from
broken bones and injuries and things
like that but now we've we've uh we've
managed many of those things. We've got
vaccines to uh and therapies against
various infections. Uh we antibiotics
and we have all this. We have wonderful
orthopedics to fix broken bones to keep
our our more active for a longer period
of time. Um but we also now subject
ourselves to massive doses of highly
processed carbohydrate foods, sitting in
traffic, getting all freaked out and
angry about something, uh creating
stress, increasing uh hormonal
imbalances, raising glucose, creating
inflammation. uh poor sleep, poor diets.
Uh this is the cancer calling card. Uh
uh so you know and how would you prevent
cancer? Uh avoid obesity, avoid type 2
diabetes, uh uh get better sleep, um you
know, make friends, get socially active,
u all of these kinds of things. Uh
reduce risk for cancer. Um, you know,
and I know I I have to sit in traffic,
uh, like a lot of people in major
cities, and I can understand you're
sitting there, you're looking at some
guy who just cut you off. That creates,
uh,
unpleasant feeling. But you've got to
find ways to relax. Um uh and uh people
sitting in front of cell phones all day
long, computers all day long, go out and
sit in traffic all day long. Run home,
try to throw something into a microwave
that's uh you know, packaged. Uh
nobody's eating organic natural foods
like we did in the past. We're not
working on farms as much as the people
did in the past. So all of these things
come together and and the consequences
are obesity, type 2, diabetes, cancer,
cardiovascular disease, and let's throw
in dementia as well. So So um our
technology as a species has far outpaced
our biology. We are still biologically
living in the paleolithic period of our
existence where we had a lot of
activity, very little carbohydrate,
processed carbs in our diets for years.
and the far and the grains that we
developed during the neolithic period of
our existence uh were more natural. They
they weren't uh engineered kinds of
things uh they had a lot of nutrition uh
associated with them. That's how we
built societies and cities around food
uh nutritious food and we had to work
and we had a lot of energy and now all
of a sudden we're in a completely
different and uh environment and and and
the more technology what people loved we
don't have to I mean people like
technology for sure uh boy the food
tasting is just unbelievable. You ever
eat a chalupa? Did you ever have some of
these hamburgers that they have now? Oh
my god, they're they're mouthwatering.
Uh but they're but they're full of like
processed stuff.
But
>> and they're they're designed I mean
designed to be uh appealing in all ways
and marketing as well. Yeah.
>> And then you wonder why you have cancer
and diabetes and all this stuff. It's
not surprising why it's not you have to
think evolutionary biology who we are as
a species where we came from. What about
our ancestors? What about the the great
apes like the chimps and the and the
gorillas? You know they don't get
cancer. They're sitting in an
environment of the natural. you know,
the experiment they don't allow to be
done. I always tell people on these
podcasts, why don't you take a bunch of
chimpanzees and and give them uh a lot
of donuts and pizza and and and
Coca-Cola every day, you know, and and
stress them out like, you know, put a
lion next to them. Ah, they're going to
go nuts, you know, not in there, but let
them see it. They get all freaked out
and and give them our diet and lifestyle
with a lot of stress and see what see
what happens to these guys. you know,
there there's never been a documented
case of breast cancer in a female
chimpanzeee and breast cancer is now
overtaking heart disease for humans, you
know, in the United States. So, I'm
saying, man, it's all diet and
lifestyle. Um, and you put yourself at
risk. Uh, and if you live according to
traditional ways, but who wants to live
according to traditional ways where you
have all these excesses in the
environment? I mean, it's it's a it's a
battle, but as long as you know about
it, then you at least can make choices.
you've mentioned ketosis as a
preventative factor for the the tribes
at the very beginning of our chat and um
and you mentioned ketosis and you talk
about crappy carbs and I just think it's
worth you know I'm a nutritionist and
nutrition is a big part of um what I
talk about and I'm interested in but in
terms of cancer it is an enormous factor
was the Lancet review was it um 2023
um broad review systematic review and
that showed that just 10% increase in
your regular uh intake of ultrarocessed
foods which is the stuff in a packet
with lots of ingredients. Um but it's
the stuff on your in your you know most
famil family's um uh cupboards. It's the
that we're talking the their breads,
their cereals, their their jarred
sauces, their microwave dinner, their
packet noodles, you know, the stuff that
they're putting in packs for their kids
to take to school. It's it's looks
normal because it's so ubiquitous. It's
it's everywhere. But just a 10% increase
increases risk of cancer significantly.
Um 13% overall cancer. But some of the
big um cancers, breast cancer um
increases your your risk of that by 11%.
Um pancreatic cancer um um 50% which is
quite a deadly cancer. So food is
significant. We we're not just saying
all lifestyle changes and kind of being
obscure about that. It's it's very
specific that we know that this increase
one in two. It wasn't when I was growing
up. It wasn't, you know, in your decades
of research, it wasn't one in two. We've
headed there because of our food system.
>> Yeah. And also lack of exercise. Lack of
>> And lack of exercise and insulin
resistance. Yeah. And diabetes. 80% of
people with cancer um on their diagnosis
of cancer have um
pre-diabetes or impaired glucose um or
they have diabetes 80% I don't think
people know that and and obesity did you
say earlier has now overtaken smoking as
the biggest risk factor
>> and and not only that when you when you
see little kids um that are obese five
and seveny old kids this is parental
neglect don't these parents understand
that there's that their uh failure to
monitor their child's diet and lifestyle
is putting that child at risk for a a
truncated lifespan. They don't do they
not know this
>> again the dissonance and the not
understanding how to do it and then some
people leave in food deserts but the
information coming you know I'm you know
fed my children healthily is and you
feed your children healthfully to what
you know is healthy and I've learned you
know that I've made mistakes along the
way the homemade sweet date treats that
I was cooking because they were all um
preparing because they're all natural
they were I was super sugar sugary
loading them with natural sugar which is
you know it's it's has an impact on on
the body and um you you learn you learn
you learn but then you send them to
school I mean our children um I went to
assembly few months ago and I was like
so shocked like oh we're delighted with
this classroom they've got the best
attendance you know we would like to
reward them with a Domino's pizza like
you are kidding me and so you're you
it's a you've got the state against
parents and the food environment. But I
I know what you're saying. You know, we
ultimately we've got to take all action
that we possibly can that's within our
hands to
>> be eligible. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Again,
yeah. There has to be some level of
knowledge. Um and I know there's so much
misinformation
that the poor poor person uh hears this
and that and they say, "Oh, this is good
for you. That's not good for you. This
is they say it's good, then they say
it's not good." And it's so much
misinformation pushed at you. The only
thing you need to know is keep your
mitochondria healthy. If you can keep
your mitochondria healthy, then and you
say, "Well, how do I keep my
mitochondria?" Don't eat.
>> Don't don't eat for three days. Your
mitochondria are super healthy.
>> Yeah. Autophagy. That's how many people
say, "Is there anything else I can do
besides not eat for three days?"
>> You have something easier to do?
>> Well, yeah. We I mean initially if you
want to get healthier then there's um I
mean stages isn't it depending on what
stage you're at and how serious. I mean
if you're at diagnosis stage you you
know you'd be wanting to talk ketosis
pretty quickly get your head around
fasting and ketosis. Oh
>> yeah ketosis but don't forget as a as a
as a species we we lived in keto we were
constantly in ketosis. We had a lot of
energy, very little food, zero processed
carbohydrates. Uh, think about it. We
over hundreds of thousands of years of
our existence, we lived in ketosis. We
evolved to starve. And now we have this
abundance of carbs and we have an
obesity epidemic, a cancer epidemic, a
diabetes epidemic. Um, and this, if you
want to know about biological evolution,
all you have to do is look around and
see the obesity epidemic. Obesity is
biological evolution in action. That's
your evidence that biological evolution
is where we came from and species
evolved. And the fact that we're in a
new environment puts us at massive risk
because most of our existence as a
species was in a starved environment and
our mitochondria were super healthy. But
now we have all the abundances that
we've always craved at our fingertips
everywhere. And we pay a price for that.
And that price is diabetes, cancer,
cardiovascular disease, dementia, and
all of the various chronic diseases that
we can think of.
>> Absolutely. Couldn't agree more. And uh
you know, bringing it back to healthy
mitochondria, um there's actions that we
can take. So because 92 95% is shown to
be environmental and it's this, you
know, it is the sleep as well, it is the
exercise and but diet is a an enormous
chunk of it. the food we put in our
mouths every day is is is phenomenally
important and how we manage our you know
stress and and
>> you know it's amazing it's amazing we
live as long as we do considering how
how we abuse our body
>> I know some guy live to be 80 years old
just constantly abusing you got to take
your hat off to that guy you know some
people smoke and drink and eat all that
stuff they're super fat and they still
make it to 80 it's unbelievable so but
not not not it takes a really lot to
bruise your body to get cancer.
>> Yeah. And there's um we yeah, we do have
to our body is designed to fight it off.
It's designed to um get rid of those and
clear out those those um um damaged
cells. Um, so I'm I would be really
interested to know what keeps you
motivated because you said you live this
you you know you work through the night
you research your your rates of talks uh
that you give and podcast that you
kindly give your time to um uh
interviews that you give and also these
research papers that you um pour over
and then produce yourselves and that
your book as well your fantastic um
comprehensive book. Um, so how what
keeps you mo motivated? Is this personal
to you?
>> I think it's a it's a mission. I mean,
when you when you have a clear idea of
what's going on
>> and I I use my students uh to find out
to make sure I'm not crazy. Um because
their job is to make sure that our
concepts when you read the science and
you understand it,
am I what am I missing here? What what
what what piece of the puzzle do I do I
do I not understand? And the answer is
we can't. Nobody's proving me wrong. Um
they're not saying, "Oh, this guy's
completely wrong." Where's the science
that says I'm wrong, you know. Um
they're not because the science that I
have is solid. It's rock solid. It was
started by Otto Warberg and we've just
simply built upon that. So um these guys
were giants in the field of biochemistry
and and science, you know, and
chemistry. And we're and we're proving
these guys now. They made mistakes of
course but they because the information
wasn't available at that time but now
that it is uh they are the platform and
we're just building on that platform
with newer uh evidence to support it. So
the science is rock solid. The problem
is we have interfering uh issues um uh
that uh either either move people away
from the science or try to confound the
science. Um, even my own field, don't
think that all of you can argue with uh
people who say, "Oh, no, he's wrong. Um,
uh, mitochondria are perfectly healthy."
No, they're not. Show me. I look at my
papers and you show me where I'm wrong
about that. Oh, I didn't see that paper.
Well, how could you not see that paper?
It's It's one thing for the guy on the
street not to see the paper. It's
another thing for the guy in the field
not to know about what what I said. And,
you know, they don't they don't attack.
They stand away from it. And a lot of
people are locked into their into their
uh departments and they don't want to
disturb the whole the grant funding
agencies. People have to get grants to
do the same crap that everybody else
does. Everybody follows the leader and
and what the leader says, everybody does
that other way. They're not going to
survive. Um you know, so uh yeah, it it
takes time. I understand. Listen, it
took 1,800 years for the the world to
realize that the sun was the center of
the solar system. If we have to wait
another 1,800 years before they realize
that cancer is a mitochondrial metabolic
disease, then maybe we'll all be dead of
cancer before we before anybody comes to
realize what we're saying. Uh because
it's got to stop. This tragedy has got
to stop and it can. But there's got to
be entrepreneurs out there. There's got
to be people to to to make this whole
process move in the right direction. And
and the other thing that kills me is
that people raise money for breast
cancer, colon cancer. They all think
their cancer is something different from
everybody else's cancer. It's one
disease. No, I don't care where it comes
from. Whether it's a colon, a breast, a
bladder, they all ferment. They all have
the same problem. So, we should not have
breast cancer, colon cancer, lung cancer
societies. There should be one society.
Unite the tribes. You got to unite the
tribes. It's one disease common to all
the different tissues. And once people
realize that breast should merge with
lung should emerge with colon and they
and a worldwide organization to come
together and say cancer is one singular
disease of energy metabolism. It might
start in some guy's brain, another
person's breast, somebody's bladder,
somebody's colon. It's the same damn
disease. It's driven by fermentation
metabolism. So why don't we have a
singular treatment strategy that will
manage the majority of cancers? Until
that those concepts become more widely
recognized, we're going to be stumbling
around with these crazy clinical trials
based on an incorrect theory with no
significant improvement in overall
well-being of the population. So I I
don't know. I mean you're you're doing
your job uh some letting people hear
what I have to say but if people really
want to know they should read the papers
that we publish open access uh you can
go our our research is supported not
surprisingly by private foundations and
philanthropy
uh in my earlier years of course the
federal government supported uh a lot of
my research but it wasn't designed to at
that at that time to to have a clinical
benefit. It was pure what we call basic
research, basic scientific research. It
wasn't had a it didn't have a
translation or clinical application. But
once you start doing that, then the the
you rock the boat and and things are are
there's a lot of hostility uh in the
cancer field about who's right, who's
not right. There's a lot of it's very
different from some other fields. I
don't know what it is. Maybe it's the
money involved. Maybe it's the the the
egos and the power. But whatever it is,
um it can't last. Uh otherwise we have
too many dead people suffering
enormously and that that has to stop.
>> Looking at other fields, the epilepsy
field, then the diabetes and you know
obesity and weight fields um and now
these um you know mental health,
psychiatry but metabolic uh um
solutions. All of those fields have had
to really um slog it out over a very
long period of time over entrenched
views that metabolic health is totally
separate to um mental health or or
psychiatric health or um psych or um
diabetes, you know, isn't an issue with
carbohydrate intolerance, for example.
And and we touched on epilepsy. But
yeah, I mean this this sounds bigger
because the entire theory is uh and and
all of the infrastructure is all based
around the um genetic theory. Um but in
in terms of um people getting informed
and following your work or getting
involved in some way um how can they
follow you? How can they find you in
your work?
>> Yeah, they make donations to my uh
biology department at the university at
Boston College. uh they support Travis
Christopherson's foundation. I send them
kits of information. Um you know, more
and more people are are reaching out. Uh
I just wish that we had have training. I
wish the hospitals would have uh train
trained people in knowing how to do
metabolic certification.
>> Uh people who who should be certified.
They they should have a a training
program that's certified by those by
those of us that really know uh what to
do and how to do it. We want to train
physicians uh to do this. So there's
when you go to get metabolic therapy,
you're being not by some charlatan, some
some quack who doesn't know anything
about science uh is treating people. Uh
and that's another thing you have to
always be careful about because uh
whenever you transition from one field
to another, there's always those
exploiters uh that try to make it look
like they know what they're talking
about. um just read my scientific papers
and get a feel like and understand the
science so you're not illiterate when it
comes to understanding the concepts and
then you'll know pretty much whether
some guy knows what he's talking about
or not. Um and you know I know some of
the papers might not be easily digested
from the by the people in the field or
or that in the in the the lay public but
I tell you when people have cancer you'd
be surprised how smart they become in
the shortest period of time. I I wish my
students would embrace the knowledge
that fast.
>> Yeah. No, I've seen it. I've seen people
who've got their head around so much
information. Um, picked protocols
including ketosis. Um, cooked their own
food. I know a family who actually
bought a camper van so that they when
they were having when she was having
chemo treatment, she her husband would
cook her an omelette, bring it up to her
in the ward rather than have the ward
food and the extra piece of cake and all
the biscuits that the um staff were, you
know, pushing on then. Um, so yeah, it
blows my mind what people have done and
have achieved themselves. Um, but you're
pushing to change a whole industry and
change a protocol.
>> Well, we we we also we also built the
glucose ketone index calculator uh to
allow every person to know whether
they're in the right zone. So, in other
words, how do I know I'm in ketosis?
Well, the blood work from a finger prick
can tell you right away uh whether
you're in nutritional ketosis, which is
a ratio of 2.0 or below, the ratio of
glucose to ketones in the blood.
>> And the Keto Mojo meter, which is
available by Amazon. Uh people are
buying that. Uh there's also the free
Libra blood blood monitor on the arm. Uh
there's new technologies that are coming
out uh that can allow apps on the phone
to know whether you're in ketosis or
not. Um all of these things are are
becoming available for the cancer
patient to know what they can and cannot
eat which differs from one person to the
next.
>> So it's not like oh what can I eat? I
don't know. You might eat different
something different. What does it do to
your glucose ketone index your GKI?
>> And it says oh it's or throwing. Well
don't eat that. You know it's not that
hard to know. So, uh, all of these
things are tools that can allow the
patient to better understand where they
stand with respect to their mitochondria
health. Just remember low GKI, the
mitochondria humming, humming with
excitation because they're getting very,
very healthy with a low GKI number.
That's how we evolved. That's who we
were as a species. Low GKI. We didn't
have any of these chronic diseases. We
had other issues, but we didn't have
chronic diseases. Do we want to go back?
We don't I'm not saying go back and live
in a cave, but all I'm saying is is that
you you have a tool to allow you to know
uh whether your diet and lifestyle is uh
putting you in a pristine state of
health.
Thank you so much for making this your
mission in life and I can see clearly
that it's been a mission from looking at
your talks, your book, um all your
papers, decades and decades of work and
and trying to warn us and trying to
support people to have have another
option.
>> Well, thank you very much, Claire. It's
been a real pleasure speaking with you